1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Scope of Work
The purpose of this report is to provide The City of Calgary (The City) with a summary of the forensic investigation
into the failure of The City’s Bearspaw South Feedermain (BSFM), and distressed pipe located subsequent to the initial
failure. This report will outline the findings obtained through various field, laboratory, and desktop investigations of
the initial rupture and subsequent Phase 1 repairs. This report will not detail any findings of the Phase 2 repairs, as
they were ongoing at the time of this report but will cover the electromagnetic inspection results of the entire
Prestressed Concrete Cylinder Pipe (AWWA C301) portion of the BSFM. Key findings of potential causes for the
material failures and pipe distress will be provided, but this report is not intended to be a root cause analysis.

1.2
Background
On June 5, 2024, The City experienced a significant break on the BSFM. This feedermain is the backbone of The City’s
transmission network, conveying water from the Bearspaw Water Treatment Plant (BWTP) directly into the Glenmore
Pressure Zone (PZ). This is The City’s largest PZ, which feeds numerous other PZ’s, ultimately providing water service
to over 90% of The City’s population, as well as Regional Customers. See Figure 1-1 on the following page.

The BSFM is 10.84 km in length and is comprised of the following segments:
•
1.61 km 1950 mm diameter AWWA C200 steel pipe.
•
5.94 km 1950 mm diameter AWWA C301 prestressed concrete cylinder pipe (PCCP).
•
3.29 km 1500 mm diameter AWWA C301 PCCP.

During the response to the initial rupture, The City performed electromagnetic inspections of the pipe 2.5 km
upstream (west) and 1.7 km downstream (east) of the failed pipe. This was the maximum length of pipe that could be
inspected given equipment and time limitations. These inspections revealed additional distressed pipe segments
resulting in the decision to perform immediate repairs of five additional sites before returning the BSFM to service.
Following return to service, The City performed further electromagnetic inspection of the BSFM, covering the full
5.9 km length of 1950 mm diameter AWWA C301 and 3.3 km of 1500 mm diameter AWWA C301 pipe that forms
part of the BSFM. An additional 0.5 km of 1200 mm C301 feedermain leading into the Memorial Drive Pump
Station #5 was inspected as well. The steel (AWWA C200) section of BSFM was not inspected.

The City requested Associated Engineering (AE) to conduct a forensic investigation of the initial rupture, also
considering information gathered from the proactively repaired pipes in Phase 1 which were identified through
electromagnetic inspection.

1.3
Investigation Summary
AE compiled information from various sources including The City and its subconsultants to form this forensic
investigation. These inputs include the following:
•
Field observations and measurements with pipes in-situ by AE.
•
Field observations and measurements by AE following pipe exhumation and hydroblasting coordinated by The
City.
•
Stray current assessment by Corrpro (AE subconsultant).
•
Laboratory analysis of mortar, concrete, and steel samples by Tetra Tech, Pure Technologies (Pure), and
Thurber Engineering (AE subconsultant).
•
Soil samples adjacent to and in close proximity to the feedermain by The City’s subcontractors and Thurber
Engineering (AE subconsultant).
•
Desktop review of record drawings and AWWA standards.
•
Pure’s Finite Element Analysis.
•
Geo-Environmental review by AE.
•
Pure’s Electromagnetic Inspection results.
