10
MORTAR AND CONCRETE ANALYSIS
Tetra Tech was retained by Pure to conduct laboratory analysis of the mortar and concrete core samples obtained
from the June 5, 2024 rupture. Tetra Tech’s report (in Appendix H) concluded that the mortar and concrete used in
the Class 16 pipe, which ruptured, was of good to excellent quality and would have met C301 standards. There was no
mortar deterioration or chemical attack, and the level of chlorides in the mortar and concrete were low, so they were
not a contributing factor to the deterioration of the steel components.

AE’s subconsultant Thurber Engineering conducted an analysis of the mortar and concrete samples of the pipes which
were exhumed in the Phase 1 repairs. Thurber’s analysis (in Appendix D) determined that 3 of the 4 pipes exhumed
(Pure Robotic Pipe 20095, 20202, 20219) had chloride ions penetrate the mortar that exceeded American Concrete
Institute thresholds.
•
Pipe 20095 showed evidence of chloride penetration in the mortar samples where distress was noted, but not
in areas where the pipe was in otherwise good shape. There was also no chloride penetration of the outer
concrete core.
•
Pipe 20202 showed evidence of chloride penetration in the mortar samples where distress was noted, but not
in areas where the pipe was in otherwise good shape. There was evidence of chloride penetration of the outer
concrete core in some of the distressed areas.
•
Pipe 20219 showed evidence of chloride penetration in the mortar samples where distress was noted, and
generally not where the pipe appeared sound.
•
Pipe 20220 had only one core taken, which did not show evidence of chloride penetration of the mortar or
concrete.

It is important to note here that the fabrication drawings of the pipes routinely listed the use of Type V Sulphate
resistant cement. While soils with high sulphates are more commonly found in Calgary than soils with high chloride
levels, sulphate resistant cement is considered to be one of the least resistant mixes to chloride penetration.
